[Music]
there are so many nights that I really
try very hard to stay awake to remember
what my mother looked like what my
father looked like what my brothers
looked like what we did together I try
so hard to see their faces I try to look
at my children my grandchildren and see
if I can find their faces in them I wish
I could remember more I try so hard to
remember that I guess maybe I'm afraid
of remembering I would like to remember
the good times I don't remember the bad
times but I know once the war started
everything was bad because I really have
managed to forget so much of my life at
that point and start a whole new life I
wish I could remember but I'm glad that
I'm not living in the past
[Music]
my name is Rena Quint I was born
December 18th 1935 in petrikov Poland
and my name was fragile Liechtenstein my
parents Sarah and the attack had lived
in petricka for a long time my mother
came from a large family they came from
a town nearby and my father was born in
petrikov I had two brothers two older
brothers one was Yesi and one was David
and my name at that time was Fred Jeff
Radel I was the youngest I was the baby
my parents were married in petrica by a
very famous rabbi his reign was Rabbi
Meir Shapiro
he left petrikov to go to Lublin where
he built a place called hotmail Lublin
when he left rabbi Lau took over and he
became the rabbi in our hometown he was
in the great synagogue but there were
many other little ste block and
synagogues all around
[Music]
my mother was way ahead of her time
because she owned a store a paint store
and my father apparently she had put him
into business because she had given him
two sewing machines and he became a
tailor but it wasn't just a tailor for
one person and what was one of these
gentlemen tailors where he made suits
for many different people one of the
things that I do remember is the child
that my mother made she had a big pot
where she put meat beans barley and
potatoes and my brothers David and Jesse
would put me on a sled it seemed to me
that it was snowing a lot in petrikov
and they would pull me to the bakery
where there were many many people who
brought pots with child in it and they
would bake there all night and then on
Shabbat afternoon people would go and
get them back and bring them to the
house where the aroma the smell was
really the smell of Shabbat and I'm sure
there must have been lots of company we
lived in a house with four stories and
we had many many cousins aunts uncles
and neighbors who were like family and
everybody shared Shabbat together and I
imagine there were the old smear out
that we sank together and unfortunately
many of those things stopped and I don't
remember the melodies ooh and I hear
melodies very often I think were these
the songs we sang
I don't remember what my mother or my
father or my brothers looked like I
don't remember very much about my early
childhood the war started when I was
three and a half years old
[Music]
the war broke out Germans came in to
petrikov everybody was going scurvy
nobody knew what was going on planes
were coming overhead tanks were coming
in the German army came in full speed
the Polish army was not prepared for any
of this people were trying to run into
different towns but it didn't help very
much because the Germans soon entered
those other towns many of the people
including my family and my aunts and
cousins all ran down into the basement
with the basement was filled with food
especially potatoes and other things
that would would were left there just in
case
something like that happened you can
smell the potatoes going there people
came down there was very cold there were
dead horses there were dead dogs there
were dead people all lying and the
gutters and everybody was just hurrying
all around there was tension that was
going through everybody knew the war had
started life changed
[Music]
right away the first ghetto that was
organized when the Nazis came in was
petrikov Bob Boyer fences were burned
around and and people could not get out
of the ghetto there wasn't enough food
people try to save things beforehand it
was just before Rosh Hashanah but rabbi
Lau told people not to go because it was
dangerous to go out in the street so
people started their own minion name
their own prayer places in the places
they lived on
[Music]
at one point the ghetto got very crowded
people in surrounding towns and villages
little Staedtler could not live there
first and surrounding neighborhoods and
then in other little towns and they
moved in and our house became very very
crowded people who could not get a place
to live
lived in the mikveh or in the synagogue
people lived out on the streets people
tried to help each other children
couldn't go to school so they started
schools in homes in smaller
neighborhoods where my brothers went to
school to learn like a fader
[Music]
at one point the Germans came and they
took people who were young enough
able-bodied people like men and women
like my father and my uncle to slave
labor factories my father and my uncle
were taken to the glass factory where
they worked they were taken and they
started a smaller ghetto over there I
remained in the house with my mother and
my brothers I think my mother was able
to trade a fur coat or shoes or other
valuables that she had if you call those
valuables
maybe jewelry for food so we did not
starve but many people did and typhus
was rampant and many people died of that
it was a very contagious disease also
the hospitals were not accessible so
people stayed in their homes
[Music]
one night in the middle of the night
there was banging out through the rough
schnell schnell and germans came in and
they had everybody coming down they said
you can take whatever you want you've
got five minutes to leave the house what
would you take everybody took whatever
they could some people took photographs
thinking they're gonna come back some
people took their jewelry thinking they
could sell things for it some people
took food some people took blankets some
people took their babies and their own
mothers and we had a run down the stairs
we had to run down very very quickly
soldiers were yelling and and batting
people with their heads were their
sticks and with their guns many people
fell and other people fell on top of
them until we got out into the big
square and there from there we were
beaten and we were herded like animals
until we got to the synagogue just a few
blocks away I'm sure as a little girl I
was six years old at this point I must
have been holding on tightly to my
mother and she to me and to my brothers
there was a door in the back of the
synagogue and on the other side of the
door there was a man and I believe he
was my uncle but I had no proof of that
and he beckoned to me and he told me to
run
maybe my mother pushed me maybe dad
pushed me I don't know where I got the
nerves the courage but I ran out how
does the little girl leave her mother
it is impossible it's just not natural
for a little girl to leave her mother or
her mother to leave her some her other I
ran out the soldiers easily could have
hit me over the head could have shot me
could have pushed me back maybe they
didn't see me because there was such
pandemonium there there was such chaos
there was such fear and such crying I
don't know how it was possible but I ran
out
[Music]
that was the last time I saw my mother
and my brothers I ran out from that door
they stayed and they were taken to
Treblinka which is one of the
extermination camps in Poland
[Music]
this man who I think was with my father
was he supposed to be doing with me what
did he what could he possibly do with a
little six-year-old girl first he hit me
and then he took me to my father who was
working in the glass factory in
Hortensia when we got there my father
kissed me and he hugged me and then he
had to hide me girls were useless boys
under the age of 10 weren't worth very
much either but boys over the age of 10
could work so my father said that I was
a boy of 10 how was a little girl of six
become a boy of 10 he cut my hair as a
tailor I guess he had skill of doing
that he found some old clothes to put on
me he gave me a new name instead of my
name being Phrygia afraid oh it was now
Froy him I learned how to speak Polish
in the gender of the male in English we
don't have that life problem but in
Polish boys and girls speak differently
grammar is different I had to learn to
do that I had to learn to be very
careful when I had to go to the bathroom
my father said to try to keep out of the
way as much as possible the men helped
me many of the men knew that I didn't
belong there but they helped me in every
way if somebody of importance came in
they tried to hide me in the night time
when they were barracks I slept next to
my father and to my uncle but one night
apparently somebody came in and I was
under a blanket
maybe resented the blanket of my uncle
or another man and I was fast asleep and
I was moving around I didn't mean to be
moving around but after the soldier left
this man took me and shook me and says
you were told to be still you were told
not to move and you were moving around
you could have endangered all of us and
to this day I'm so sorry that I didn't
realize what I was doing I tried very
hard not to sleep completely in case
somebody would come in that I would not
move onto somebody's blanket
I worked very hard in the glass factory
everybody worked very hard there were
children there and we were like water
carriers and we had a pail with the
ladle and we were supposed to bring it
to the workers the workers many of them
had had like a mask over them it was
very hot and the ovens in the glass
factory work all the time and we brought
water for the men to drink I don't think
the Germans cared about being thirsty
but if you wouldn't he wouldn't drink
and you would faint you wouldn't work
and their whole purpose was for you to
work more than anything I remember that
factories there were these big German
Shepherd dogs and every time one of the
soldiers decided to have some fun or he
decided to teach us a lesson he was sick
one of those dogs onto a group of people
and whoever was the poor person who
became that culprit and he had a bite
out of his arm if you couldn't live you
arm they would shoot you it fur got
infected there was no medicine they were
no bandages too bad people were dying of
those dog bites you never forget the dog
bites no matter how much people tell you
don't be afraid of this big dog the fear
of those dogs never leaves you
[Music]
I was in the factory with my father and
with my uncle and they tried very hard
to keep me away from everything we
worked very hard but one day they
decided they didn't want any juice left
in Poland and so again there was one of
these actions where people came in and
again we had to get ready and go into
place called the unlock plots where
their cattle cars waiting on on the
wrong and I went with the men and we
were again being pushed and shoved until
we got into those cattle cars 80 to a
hundred people were put into those
cattle cars there was nothing to eat
there there was nothing to drink and
there was one pail which was used for
the bathroom men women and children used
that pail it was cold it was freezing
cold it seems to me was always cold
there was always snow around finally we
crossed over from the border from the
Polish to the German border the doors
were flung open and we hadn't jumped
down from those cattle cars the Germans
came and with megaphones with bull horns
they made an announcement that were
being taken to camps men on one side
women on the other my father now
realized he had a problem I was a boy in
a man's camp but when you go into the
into concentration camp or whatever we
were going to be sent
they said that everybody knew that you'd
have to get undressed I don't think the
Germans cared about you being clean even
though I'm full of lice and fleas and
and sicknesses and and and and dirt and
smells but they knew that you'd have to
get undressed to go into the showers and
if I'd get undressed my father knew that
they would see I'm not one of the men
and they would kill me they would kill
him and anybody who tried to help us
when we jumped off the trains he looked
around and he saw a woman who had come
from one of the other factories one of
the slave labor camps
and he asked her she would keep an eye
on me he had some pictures that he had
he gave me those pictures and he said
look at the pictures and see it's a
mother and father and three children two
boys and a girl that was one of my
brothers and I and he said the war is
going to be over right away
very soon the war will be over and he
will meet me in our hometown in petrica
he promised to meet me
father's supposed to keep their promises
my father didn't keep his promise I
found a train schedule where he was said
to book an Wald I went with my new
mother I don't remember what she looked
like I don't remember her name but I
know that she saved my life
and I went with her that was the last
time I saw my father but I had a new
mother
[Music]
when we finally got to bergen-belsen and
so many of the people had either been
shot or just fell down and died along
the way we were brought into a big room
and we were told just the way my father
had predicted to get undressed the
Germans wanted you go dressed rested
because we were so filthy so smelly so
disgusting
after those terrible days in the cattle
cars so they wanted you to get washed so
that they wouldn't be around such
terrible filth but the other thing is
that if you had anything they could come
to skate everything that you had and
they could give you some old dress or
uniform or something like that we had to
get undressed my father had given me
some pictures those pictures were
important I was holding them in my hand
one of the soldiers saw that I was
holding maybe he thought it was money or
valuables or a diamond he pried open my
hand he must have been very disappointed
because they were just pictures of a
family of a mother and father and three
children toward them up and threw them
away to him it meant nothing to me it
would have meant an awful lot because
then if I had any pictures I would have
known what my mother and my father and
brothers looked like and I don't
when we came out of the showers the
freezing cold showers and this time they
warm water this woman dared to steal a
black coat that somebody else had left
there we were shivering because we was
cold we were scared we are humiliated
she stole a black coat she could have
been killed for doing such a dastardly
thing but she kept the coat around the
two of us the warmth of the coat and the
body heat from the two of us I think
kept us alive even though she didn't
give birth to me she gave me a life at
that point I was with this new woman I
don't know how long I was with her
because all of a sudden she disappeared
one day I was very sick with typhus it
was smelly it was disgusting inside the
barracks and I found myself somehow
others sleeping or being outside I don't
know if I want by myself or if somebody
took me but I was lying around with
bodies and I was lying out there and
something happened that day that never
happened before soldiers came in
soldiers wearing different uniforms so
just acting very kind soldiers who were
throwing up Nazi soldiers never threw up
but these were British soldiers and they
came in and they made an announcement in
a strange language we must have been
English saying you're free you're free
as I fry you can do anything you want
we are the British Army we have come we
have brought you food we have brought
you medical help you're free what do I
want to do I don't have a mother I don't
have a father
I can't move typhus is the kind of
sickness where you can't see and you
can't hear and you have like vertigo
everything is flying I was about nine
years old at this point many people died
I did not God meant for me to live
[Music]
before I was adopted in the United
States the adoption laws require that
there's nobody in the biological family
that wants the child nobody wanted me
cuz there was nobody left alive to look
after me but by parents my adoptive
parents looked very very hard and they
found a woman in Sweden who knew my
family and she sort of told them of what
happened not to look for them but when I
used to walk through the streets and if
I would see somebody who looks familiar
I sort of say could that possibly be my
father or my my brothers I can't imagine
what my mother looked like at all none
of those people ever turned out to be
blood relatives I grew up I went through
elementary school I went to high school
they sent me to a public high school but
I I went out of the neighborhood because
I have had Hebrew in this private school
so I was able to go to head first
because I was so behind as far as my age
and then I went on to Brooklyn College I
was very lucky because I was popular I
liked people I always liked people I was
I was made friends very easily maybe
that's how I got so many mothers or
maybe they just needed me as much as I
needed you very often people sort of
said that woman lost a child maybe she
took me as her child I don't know the
reasons but I always had people around
me who were good to me
[Music]
I was married March 15 1959 in September
the following year we had our first
daughter two years later that we had
another daughter two years after that
another daughter and then a son
[Music]
you
when I speak to groups and now I speak
to many groups of different kinds
different people and I feel very
strongly that what I end up with very
much now is that we have to laugh as
much as we can and we have to love as
much as we can and we have to make sure
that Israel is safe and free this is our
country and then anybody who needs a
place to come back to can have a place
to be go back through we have an
important role
survivors are dying out so people who I
speak to I sort of find that I'm asking
them to be our ambassadors to speak and
make sure that other people who
remembered I feel very strongly that
anybody who wants to hear about the
Holocaust it is my obligation to tell
them
[Music]
I always think of my mother on her last
trip to Treblinka when I ran out of the
synagogue and she and Devon and yes II
went what was she thinking on that last
trip
did my mother think about what happened
to her little girl I hope she looks down
from heaven now to see that the little
girl she left at the age of six became a
wife a mother a grandmother
great-grandmother and life has continued
[Music]
you